README.md, before:

![GitHub tag (latest by date)](https://img.shields.io/github/v/tag/agrabz/SwiftUIViewTree)

# Usage

Use `.renderViewTree(of: self)` to see the view tree visually next to your original view.

<img width="2622" height="1206" alt="Simulator Screenshot - iPhone 16 Pro - 2025-09-29 at 10 39 17" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/0a3396c7-c9ba-4558-8973-d20124597b18" />

The screenshot above is produced by the code below:

```swift
struct ContentView: View {
    @State var isTapped = false

    var body: some View {
        Button {
            isTapped.toggle()
        } label: {
            VStack {
                Image(systemName: "globe")
                    .imageScale(.large)
                    .foregroundStyle(.tint)
                Text(isTapped ? "Yo what?" : "Hello, world!")
                    .bold(isTapped ? true : false)
            }
            .padding()
        }
        .renderViewTree(of: self) // <--------
    }
}
```

Without the `.renderViewTree(of: self)` line the view would be just like:

<img width="524.4" height="241.2" alt="Simulator Screenshot - iPhone 16 Pro - 2025-09-29 at 10 57 40" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/31dfc7c4-ed70-4442-b0a7-984808b74607" />

# Features

## Pinch to zoom and scroll

You can also pinch to zoom and scroll to any direction:

https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b0756ae5-9318-4f92-a82c-59788132cdbe


## Node color change on updates

If something got updated due to a state change it gets a new color:

https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/132e4292-ad7e-4931-8324-2442e309e95a

https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/78de71ea-5ea5-4dc0-bac1-98c3627c86df


## Change Detection | Printing to the console

When a node gets a new color you can also see it in the console:

```
🚨Changes detected
"_value": "Bool"
🟥Old value: "false"
🟩New value: "true"
```

## Double tap a node to Collapse/ Expand

If certain parts of the tree are redundant for you, then you can double tap to collapse and later reopen them:

https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/d20066a0-d73a-45cc-91c9-4cda23e5b082

A collapsed node is always gray and a badge indicates how many descendants it has:

<img width="919" height="514" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/0b1c51b2-bbb2-4823-b062-25c8fd3d2169" />

## Tap a node to see full details

You might not want to zoom in always to see the details of a specific node. 
In that case you can tap on any node to print its full details.

```
Node Details:
    Label: _value
    Type: Bool
    Value: true
```

## Swift 6 Support

The solution is fully compatible with Swift 6.

# Why is this useful?

SwiftUI can produce unexpected updates that are hard to troubleshoot with the tools provided by Apple.

To troubleshoot and better understand the surprises of SwiftUI you might find this library useful.

There are numerous articles on the web that are about this topic. I'll collect some of my favorites and reference them here as the repository matures.

- [SWIFTUI THAT PAIN: REFRESH , REDRAWS, RESET— X — FILE](https://thexcodewhisperer.medium.com/swiftui-refresh-x-file-4502c98e00cd)

# Roadmap

- Add licence

- Closable, reopenable viewtree window

- Setable frame for the view tree

- Supporting `Any` type and not just `SwiftUI.View`

- Supporting logs for production usage

- Dedicated documentation page

- Explicit support for iPad and Mac.

- CI on PRs

- Add history of graph state to be able to track quick changes e.g. image blinking

- Do more tests with animations, navigations

- Build a table in the documentation of tested view types - maybe

# Alternatives

Probably the closest alternative is using SwiftUI's built-in, documented, but still private APIs:

```swift
let _ = Self._printChanges()
let _ = Self._logChanges()
```

As their name suggests, these APIs do not provide any UI, unlike this library.

Another alternative to figure out the exact type of a `SwiftUI.View` you can simply change the `some View` return type of the `body` computed variable to a definitely wrong type like `String`. 

With that you can see from the compiler error message the concrete type of your view. 

In the below example the (more) concrete type is `VStack<TupleView<(some View, Text)>>`

```swift
struct ContentView: View {
    var body: String { // Compiler error: Cannot convert return expression of type 'VStack<TupleView<(some View, Text)>>' to return type 'String'
        VStack {
            Image(systemName: "globe")
                .imageScale(.large)
                .foregroundStyle(.tint)
            Text("Hello, world!")
                .font(.largeTitle)
                .bold()
        }
    }
}

```

This means that you can change the type of the `body` to `VStack<TupleView<(some View, Text)>>` and the compiler will be okay with that.

```swift
struct ContentView: View {
    var body: VStack<TupleView<(some View, Text)>> { // No error, this compiles
        VStack {
            Image(systemName: "globe")
                .imageScale(.large)
                .foregroundStyle(.tint)
            Text("Hello, world!")
                .font(.largeTitle)
                .bold()
        }
    }
}

```

However you might already see the two limitations of this approach:
1. There's yet again a `some View` in the type, so you still don't know the concrete type.

What's worse is that figuring that out is not as straightforward as it was in the above example.

2. You don't see all the details that are made visible by this package. For example all the properties of the types.

# Support

If you face any problems, or have any feature request please feel free to open an Issue.

# Contribution

While I'm not new to open source development, I'm new to being the author of a library. Any help is welcome, please feel free to open PRs.

# Credits

This project is based on the work of Chris Eidhof (objc.io). In his 2019 Swiftable conference talk called "SwiftUI under the hood" ([link](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GuK6wwX8M0E)), he demoed a helper function which he called `.mirror()`. His mirror view modifier can be applied to any kind of SwiftUI View and will render its "viewtree" next to it:

<img width="1876" height="905" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/4605091a-bfaa-4ed1-b802-8297e39433ac" />

While his talk is not primarily about this helper function, it got the attention of many people as it seems to be a really promising debugging tool.

Additionally when I started to work on my implementation of his tool, I researched GitHub for any open source Swift projects for building graphs and I found [danielctull-playground/TreeView](https://github.com/danielctull-playground/TreeView) where the author describes the repository as "Implementation following the objc.io TreeView". 

I ended up using this repository's implementation with some tweaks, so I have to give the credits again to Chris and the whole objc.io team.

Commit message:

Revise README with new screenshots and zoom feature
Updated images and added double tap zoom instructions.

README.md, after:

![GitHub tag (latest by date)](https://img.shields.io/github/v/tag/agrabz/SwiftUIViewTree)

# Usage

Use `.renderViewTree(of: self)` to see the view tree visually next to your original view.

<img width="2730" height="1368" alt="RocketSim_Screenshot_iPhone_16_Pro_6 3_2025-12-05_00 07 15" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/dce23278-cb45-450e-ba30-b017092f2d82" />

The screenshot above is produced by the code below:

```swift
struct ContentView: View {
    @State var isTapped = false

    var body: some View {
        Button {
            isTapped.toggle()
        } label: {
            VStack {
                Image(systemName: "globe")
                    .imageScale(.large)
                    .foregroundStyle(.tint)
                Text(isTapped ? "Yo what?" : "Hello, world!")
                    .bold(isTapped ? true : false)
            }
            .padding()
        }
        .renderViewTree(of: self) // <--------
    }
}
```

Without the `.renderViewTree(of: self)` line the view would be just like:

<img width="524.4" height="241.2" alt="Simulator Screenshot - iPhone 16 Pro - 2025-09-29 at 10 57 40" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/31dfc7c4-ed70-4442-b0a7-984808b74607" />

# Features

## Pinch to zoom and scroll

You can also pinch to zoom and scroll to any direction:

![RocketSim_Recording_iPhone_16_Pro_6 3_2025-12-05_00 12 28](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a7059181-f7b0-4458-9f55-171749bd65f1)

## Double tap to zoom

You can apply stepped zoom by doulbe tapping on the view tree's canvas.

![RocketSim_Recording_iPhone_16_Pro_6 3_2025-12-05_00 14 28](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/81387caa-f021-43fd-8fc6-5ff6e882f5e8)

## Node color change on updates

If something got updated due to a state change it gets a new color:

https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/132e4292-ad7e-4931-8324-2442e309e95a

https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/78de71ea-5ea5-4dc0-bac1-98c3627c86df


## Change Detection | Printing to the console

When a node gets a new color you can also see it in the console:

```
🚨Changes detected
"_value": "Bool"
🟥Old value: "false"
🟩New value: "true"
```

## Double tap a node to Collapse/ Expand

If certain parts of the tree are redundant for you, then you can double tap to collapse and later reopen them:

https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/d20066a0-d73a-45cc-91c9-4cda23e5b082

A collapsed node is always gray and a badge indicates how many descendants it has:

<img width="919" height="514" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/0b1c51b2-bbb2-4823-b062-25c8fd3d2169" />

## Tap a node to see full details

You might not want to zoom in always to see the details of a specific node. 
In that case you can tap on any node to print its full details.

```
Node Details:
    Label: _value
    Type: Bool
    Value: true
```

## Swift 6 Support

The solution is fully compatible with Swift 6.

# Why is this useful?

SwiftUI can produce unexpected updates that are hard to troubleshoot with the tools provided by Apple.

To troubleshoot and better understand the surprises of SwiftUI you might find this library useful.

There are numerous articles on the web that are about this topic. I'll collect some of my favorites and reference them here as the repository matures.

- [SWIFTUI THAT PAIN: REFRESH , REDRAWS, RESET— X — FILE](https://thexcodewhisperer.medium.com/swiftui-refresh-x-file-4502c98e00cd)

# Roadmap

- Add licence

- Closable, reopenable viewtree window

- Setable frame for the view tree

- Supporting `Any` type and not just `SwiftUI.View`

- Supporting logs for production usage

- Dedicated documentation page

- Explicit support for iPad and Mac.

- CI on PRs

- Add history of graph state to be able to track quick changes e.g. image blinking

- Do more tests with animations, navigations

- Build a table in the documentation of tested view types - maybe

# Alternatives

Probably the closest alternative is using SwiftUI's built-in, documented, but still private APIs:

```swift
let _ = Self._printChanges()
let _ = Self._logChanges()
```

As their name suggests, these APIs do not provide any UI, unlike this library.

Another alternative to figure out the exact type of a `SwiftUI.View` you can simply change the `some View` return type of the `body` computed variable to a definitely wrong type like `String`. 

With that you can see from the compiler error message the concrete type of your view. 

In the below example the (more) concrete type is `VStack<TupleView<(some View, Text)>>`

```swift
struct ContentView: View {
    var body: String { // Compiler error: Cannot convert return expression of type 'VStack<TupleView<(some View, Text)>>' to return type 'String'
        VStack {
            Image(systemName: "globe")
                .imageScale(.large)
                .foregroundStyle(.tint)
            Text("Hello, world!")
                .font(.largeTitle)
                .bold()
        }
    }
}

```

This means that you can change the type of the `body` to `VStack<TupleView<(some View, Text)>>` and the compiler will be okay with that.

```swift
struct ContentView: View {
    var body: VStack<TupleView<(some View, Text)>> { // No error, this compiles
        VStack {
            Image(systemName: "globe")
                .imageScale(.large)
                .foregroundStyle(.tint)
            Text("Hello, world!")
                .font(.largeTitle)
                .bold()
        }
    }
}

```

However you might already see the two limitations of this approach:
1. There's yet again a `some View` in the type, so you still don't know the concrete type.

What's worse is that figuring that out is not as straightforward as it was in the above example.

2. You don't see all the details that are made visible by this package. For example all the properties of the types.

# Support

If you face any problems, or have any feature request please feel free to open an Issue.

# Contribution

While I'm not new to open source development, I'm new to being the author of a library. Any help is welcome, please feel free to open PRs.

# Credits

This project is based on the work of Chris Eidhof (objc.io). In his 2019 Swiftable conference talk called "SwiftUI under the hood" ([link](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GuK6wwX8M0E)), he demoed a helper function which he called `.mirror()`. His mirror view modifier can be applied to any kind of SwiftUI View and will render its "viewtree" next to it:

<img width="1876" height="905" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/4605091a-bfaa-4ed1-b802-8297e39433ac" />

While his talk is not primarily about this helper function, it got the attention of many people as it seems to be a really promising debugging tool.

Additionally when I started to work on my implementation of his tool, I researched GitHub for any open source Swift projects for building graphs and I found [danielctull-playground/TreeView](https://github.com/danielctull-playground/TreeView) where the author describes the repository as "Implementation following the objc.io TreeView". 

I ended up using this repository's implementation with some tweaks, so I have to give the credits again to Chris and the whole objc.io team.
